You got it. You got it.
We are recording.
704 will call the regular meeting of the
planning and zoning commission to
order. First up is we'll call the
seating of alternates and Scott Pan is
not going to be able to join us tonight
and so Andreas you are filling in.
Thank you.
Um, next up is additions or changes to
the agenda. What happened?
It's fine. I can see I can see you guys.
The owl the owl is just moving with the
with the sound. Oh, okay. Well, we can't
see you anymore, I guess. Yeah, I was
putting the agenda up.
Okay, the agenda up there. Not
necessary. No.
Okay, there we're there. We're good.
Okay, so next up is additions or changes
to the agenda. And uh Wayne, do you know
if Mike is going to be here tonight for
the uh home business?
No, I he I have no information. Okay.
Um, what I what I would like to
do
is in an effort to uh get through Ryan's
stuff quick so he doesn't have to sit
around and listen to all the uh boring
stuff we do later.
uh
move
items A, B, and C ahead of old item, old
business items B, C, and
D.
So, are there any other changes proposed
to the agenda?
If not, I make a motion to
move the new business items A, B, and
C above old business B, C, and
D. Second, second that. Thank you, Ann.
Any
discussion? Hearing none, I'll call for
a vote.
Ann
Leanne, you're looks like you're muted
at the end.
in the
air. Might be getting closer.
Testing
Leanne. We'll come back here in a
minute. Andreas.
Patrick. Hi. Can I vote? I Leanne, we
got with you
yet. Leanne, have not put your vote in
the chat.
Okay, Leanne, if you can hear us, if you
turn your uh your video on, you can just
raise your hand for a yes vote or raise
your hand when we say no. I don't think
she has a camera on her computer. That's
why she has the phone.
Okay. Leanne indicated in the chat that
she she seems that she seems to be
unmuted. I'm not sure what the issue is,
but but she can see us and I think hear
us.
Hello, it's
Jim. Is there something we can do to
help you get the coms or else I can just
put you on the speaker phone here if we
can hear you?
Okay. Well, we are hearing you
here. I'm going to put you on speaker
phone so we can get we can get your vote
on the approval of the change to the
agenda and then we're going to go.
About raising my hand. Um I don't know
how I'm going to speak later if you
can't hear me. I can hear and see you.
Other than what you said about the
speaker thought if that would work.
Other than that, I don't think this has
happened before. So, I don't know what
else to do on my end. Nope. This is a
this is a new challenge, something
different, but we've got your phone and
we can hear you.
So, you agenda
it
is. It's
Oh, that speaker.
You still hear us?
I can. Yes.
That speaker is
okay. Well, nope. I muted Leanne on the
phone and that didn't fix it.
We might just have to deal with.
Anyhow,
I'm going on to the next item, which is
public
speak. And
uh anybody from the public want to talk
about something that's not on the agenda
at this point?
Okay. Uh, hearing none.
We're going to go to old business.
And the first up is a certificate of
appreciation for Jim. So, Jim, come on
up here and join me. The do we move the
new business up in front of the old
Yes. Go ahead. But you want to do that
first? Yeah. there in front of BC and D.
Oh, okay. So, we tried to do this last
month. All we have is cake basically.
So, we'll we'll do it again here. And
so, this is uh this is from the town of
Andover Proclamation wishing Jim Hely a
well-deserved and happy
retirement. Whereas Jim Hy has been a
longtime resident of the town of Andover
at Merit Valley Road. And whereas Jim
Hales has served the town for many years
as the town zoning enforcement
officer. And whereas Jim Haly had served
the town when needed is the inland
wetland and water course.
And whereas Jim Allison had dedicated
numerous hours assisting the citizens of
the town of Andover in developing
applications to the planning and zoning
commission and the zoning board of
appeals, resulting in improved quality
of life for the citizens of
Andor. Whereas Jim Hy routinely goes
above and beyond the call of duty in
serving each of the above mentioned
commissions and citizens of Andor.
Now therefore, be it resolved that the
board of selectman congratulate Jim Hy
for a job well done in serving the town
and its citizens for those many years.
Be it further resolved that the board of
selectman and the residents of Andover
wish Jim Haly a well-deserved and happy
retirement to pursue those other
interests he may so desire.
In the witness whereof, we have appeared
to set our hand and caused the seal of
the town of Vandover to be a fixed. This
was back on the 15th day of April, 2025.
So thank you very
much all you folks and I as a resident I
appreciate all the volunteer time that
you put
in or staff over and above time that you
put in. Thanks again. Thank you Jim.
Take care.
Thanks very much.
Thanks J.
Okay, next up is going to be receive
application and set public hearing date
for special permit
251 71 Bizola Road Michael Heckler home
occupation with site improvements in the
Andover Lake zone.
So, we have uh we have received the
application and I would make a motion
that we set the public
hearing to take place
uh just before our next regularly
scheduled meeting which will be on June
17th. So, the public hearing will start
at 700
p.m. Looking for a second to that.
Patrick second. Thank you. Any
discussion?
Hearing none. We'll call for vote. Ann
I. Leanne.
Hi.
I think you were coming through the L
that time, not my phone. I'm going to
try and hang up. See how it goes. I I
said I Is that better? Yep. No, that
worked out great. I I hung up on my cell
phone. So, uh, you're coming through
well now.
Andreas, I am okay. Yes,
Patrick. I And I vote I as well. The
motion passes to schedule a public
hearing on June 17th. And Wayne, you'll
have to get with Mike to make sure all
the details that I was going to go over
tonight on that will
go. Next up is to receive application
and set public hearing date, special
permit
252, 11 Buckry Hill Road, Fitch Family
Farm, Farmers Market, and various other
events.
Um, I'm going to discuss item C at the
same time for now, which is receive pit
family farm application for a text
amendment change to the zoning
regulation concerning events such as
farmers market and
related.
So, haven't given some thought on the
best way to do this. if we do your
special permit application. Now, we
can't do that because we don't have any
regulations to base the special permit
on. So, what um what I think we will do,
we've got we've got 65 days to start the
public
hearing. Then, once the public hearing
starts, we've got 35 days to close it.
And that normally encompasses two
meetings. And after that, we have to
make a decision within 65 days of
closing the public
hearing. I don't know that it's going to
take quite that long, but but the point
is we can't give you answers to all your
questions tonight. And so, uh, it's
going to take a little bit. And what I
would like to do is schedule a public
hearing on the text amendment to take
place just prior to our June 17th
meeting and
then set the public hearing for your
special permits to take place at the
meeting following
that, which would be
on July 15th. So that's within the 65
days. And that hopefully we would have a
good idea of what the text
amendment that you're asking for is
going to look like and then we can apply
special permit to the uh proposed change
and and act on there.
So with that in
mind, I'll make a motion
to conduct a public hearing on the text
amendment for the agro tourism
regulations prior to the start of our 17
June regular
meeting and a public
hearing for the special permit
applications for the agro tourism
business to take place. on July 15th
before the start of our regular meeting.
Then looking for a second and seconds.
Okay, thank you. Any discussion on that
plan? Okay. And so um
the way it'll work, we're not going to
talk about the application tonight. We
uh we've got to do that in the public
hearing forum. So on June 17th, we'll
have a discussion on the agro tourism
rigs. And I know Baron, that's why
you're here tonight is you're you've got
an interest in that. We'll we'll see how
far we get on that.
Um and whether or not we can close it at
that meeting. Irregardless of whether we
close it at that
meeting, I still think we'll be in a
position where we can open the special
permanent public hearing the following
meeting and get that going. I just want
to try to get the text amendment closed
out before we're deliberating on the uh
the special permits that are based on
the text amendment that we have to have
in our books.
So Eric's wisdom of trying to get the
text amendments done prior to even
putting in the special permits for all
those other things started bringing
through loud and clear as I was trying
to figure out the best way to do this
and keep the card on the right side of
the horse. But that's uh that's where I
think we're at. So Baron, you probably
got an interest in both the the June and
July meetings and and we'll get to hear,
you know, your thoughts on on how things
are going at that
point. And I think that is
probably Did we vote
and seconded? Okay, very good. That
whole that was discussion. Okay. Yeah.
Very good. Thank you. Now we'll vote.
Ann I Leanne
Amit
I. Thank you. Andreas I Patrick I. And I
vote I as well. The motion passes
500. So no reason for you guys to stick
around. We're we're done on that and uh
we'll see you next month. Okay. Thank
you. Thank Oh, and uh so Barrett, you
know what you know where to find the
information on what the you've got a
copy of the text amendment uh the
application for tourism rigs? I don't.
Okay. So, if you go to the planning and
zoning website,
and if you have any if you have trouble
getting there, you know, Wayne can help
you out. But if you go
under applications pending, there'll be
a bunch of stuff on the left hand side
there as you scroll down says
applications archived. Second one down
is applications pending. And uh I can't
remember well probably Ryan's second
because he's 25.
Okay. But you'll you'll see it there.
and it's got the text amendment that you
probably want to read through and all
any other stuff that uh we get posted as
we go along the way. That's where it'll
hang out. So, if you can't find it, let
Wayne know and he'll help you get there.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Any questions, Brian? You're good. Just
other than the per the special permit is
needed even if we're changing the
language.
Yes, they work hand in hand. It does.
So, we're going to put some regulations
into effect that will set some
guidelines for how to do an agro tourism
event and then you're going to come to
us with the specifics on how you're
going to do the events in your place
that comply with those regulations.
Perfect.
Okay, that's it for that. All right,
thank you guys.
Next up, getting back to old business is
going to be the plan of conservation and
development, economic development
commission.
And
so, John, I'm going to turn the
discussion over to you. Elaine is here
to uh provide maybe some feedback if she
I think she was laying on a beach
someplace reading reading your draft. I
don't know. And then Patrick can chime
in as well from the economic development
perspective.
Okay. Um I'll be I'll try to be
relatively brief. Hopefully everyone got
a chance to look at this. Um but this is
largely um a chapter that's drafted
based on the outline and focus areas
presented by economic development at
last month's meeting. Um I'll I'll just
briefly very briefly go through the the
the structure of the outline and then
I'll open it up to comments. Um so you
know a basic basic PC type chapter. Um
this is economic development uh based on
that guiding principle. uh a little bit
of background, you know, focusing on on
Andover as a a relatively small rural
community with obviously Route Six and
the Hop River at the core. Um and and
sort of setting up that ongoing
challenge of, you know, focused
development versus focused conservation
along that corridor. um a little bit of
the sort of uh nuts and bolts, economic
activity, large um current industries,
um employers, and and a little bit of uh
overview of of the commuting in and out
of Andover. Obviously, the vast majority
of folks are commuting out of Andover.
Um and uh no, you know, no major
particular concentration, a lot of small
employers.
um talks a little bit about the the
grand list and some potential
development
opportunities. Um we do there was a a
focus or a revisited focus on the
potential redevelopment of the town
garage at the core of the community. Um
as a as a as an opportunity and moving
the town garage uh you know more towards
the uh transfer station site. A little
bit more on existing conditions. We talk
about zoning. Um again, you know, the
relatively limited development corridor
focused principally around uh Route 6.
Um looking at expanding potential uses
and and encouraging, you know, broader
uptake of the developable land along
that
corridor. Um and then we get into um
some of the challenges again uh
relatively relatively limited market
potential. um looking to encourage more
flexibility and sort of growing in
place. Um again, you know, some of these
maybe multi-tenant buildings, incubator
type situations. Um as well as looking
at the potential of a village district,
which is, you know, more mixed use and
provides some flexibility while
maintaining some design control. Um and
again, you know, looking at growing
carefully along the route six corridor
because it is the hot river corridor. Um
and then we get into the three core aims
and objectives and again this is
directly from the economic development
discussion. Um the first aim is growing
Andover's grand list from within by
providing additional development
opportunities. And here we do talk about
growing in place. It's it's much easier
to encourage the development and growth
of existing businesses than it is to
recruit any outside businesses. So
finding a way from cottage industry and
homebased business to you know small
incubator to you know permanent larger
scale um is really the focus there.
um promoting tourism, making Endover a
destination. And here we we noted the
the potential for the Roshambo uh
leveraging the Roshambo Trail um and the
the World uh Rock Paper Scissors
Association. Um and then looking at
housing and then obviously you know
promoting a destination as for for
natural resources as well. Um and then
promoting housing as economic
development because it is a very
attractive community to to live in and
and you know housing is also grand list.
Housing is also growth and and you know
leveraging that and and leaning into
Andover's uh reputation as a very
positive place to live and and raise a
family um you know can be a key point of
economic growth. And then we detail I
believe it's 19 um action items um that
basically draw from those three core
principles. Um, and I I won't leave
those all. I won't read them all, but I
I'll I'll leave that up on the screen
for a moment. Um, so we can look, but I
hopefully everyone again got a chance.
And I would um invite the, you know,
Elaine and then and the EDC folks um
first first crack at this.
Sure. I'll I'll pipe in. I absolutely
loved it. I mean, it's the first time
that all of our discussions seem to have
made it on the list. Thank you, John.
You did an excellent job. Um, I I I I
don't know about being like putting in
the POC specifics like about the rock
paper scissors thing in Rosh and Bo, you
know, more put in as public activities
or something like that. Um, to tie in
our history with Roshimbo. Um, because I
people get stuck on stuff like that.
They're going, "What what are they
talking about?" you know, when it comes
to public hearings and people approving
things, I just, you know, thought maybe
genericize it a little bit more, but it
gets into the aggra tourism and trying
to um tie in our history. Um, which is
great. I love it. And actually, I I
wasn't on a a beach. Uh, Jed, we did
seven national parks in seven days with
Nevada and Utah and Colorado. And I just
we just flew in. We got to Bradley at
9:00 this morning, so I'm running on
fumes.
But I definitely wanted to say I I read
through all of these and I I think
they're great. Thanks.
Thank Patrick. I second that. Okay.
Yeah. And I have one minor correction to
the uh businesses. The uh the
MTM business had some a description
after it in the the current local
businesses and it's uh fixtures and uh
machine tools
where Okay. So um
MT Oh, right here. Yep. Providing
um MTM.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's actually networking that
it's like that's that that's what
network does. Oh, okay. Yeah. And I
think you have that in there, too. I
mean, probably a cut and paste thing.
Yeah. And Okay. And so network does the
services for intellectual disabilities
and providing connections to healthcare.
Yeah. Yes.
Okay. All right. So, let's let's move
that.
Yeah, I was surprised. I said, "Really?
That's what they do?" And I'm like,
"No." And and I'm sorry. So, so what
what do we what how should we describe
um MTM would be the best? Um they uh
their their business signage reads uh
precision fixtures and
tooling. It's a machine shop.
Okay. Tool and die. Yep. Great. Okay.
Okay. I would actually call that
precision machining. Sure. Because I
think most people don't really
understand what fixtures and tooling is
and they understand what machining is.
Perfect.
Yeah. So, if it's not bathroom fixtures,
I'm lost.
Okay. Great. Thanks.
We're you have a commission in do you
have any thoughts on it? I thought this
was great especially the
um thing here showing how the
Connecticut general statutes have I
think regulations about um allow the
zoning commissions to adopt regulations
to create the village districts. And
this stuff I thought was just fantastic
as well as all of the action
items. Really, really good. Okay, we'll
show them all to you.
Leanne, what you think?
Hi, can you hear me now? Yep.
Okay. Um, I just have a question for
clarification about the term developable
land and um having a possibly starting a
separate fund for it.
Okay.
So that's um yes.
Okay. Would that be something
that would this be something a fund that
the town would would purchase and
develop for any one of the uses? You
know, I'm not picking one now, but any
one of the uses um that's cited here,
whether it's mixed use or housing or I
mean, how would that work? Yeah. So the
idea would be um you know similar to
where the town's setting aside funds to
acquire and maintain open space um a
number of communities have developed
their own business parks um where the
town is essentially the developer. They
would you know do a subdivision or put
in a little culde-sac with you know um a
a few buildings that could be developed
that could sell as pad sites. Um, but
it's it's you know that's that's an
option or or the town could you know if
the town wanted to to you know if on a
single parcel build you know a potential
multi-tenant building and be essentially
a landlord. Um that's an option too. I
mean some of those things are can be
complex administratively. Um, and so a
number of communities basically just
develop a business park and and sell
off, you know, the pad sites, but you
know, because they control the land,
it's it's easier to, you know, put in
the the type and scale of development
that you're you're looking for. Um, but
yeah, no, I mean, it's it's essentially,
you know, opportunities for the town to
be a a developer to facilitate
development. And I don't know, Elaine,
if if you know, you Yeah. Yeah. if I can
uh pipe in a little bit. Um I know when
the Yukon landscaping um course came in
and did all of their plans
um for development of u of different
areas in town for uh recreational use
and multif family use and smaller
community use and um community center
use, things like that.
they were supposed to um uh concentrate
on town owned land. And it was kind of
interesting because one of them
concentrated on that I don't know if
it's the bulk property over above the
river, you know, over the over the river
from the church um as
developable, but it's not townowned. and
they came up with a lovely a great plan
for development for, you know, um that
we really liked, but the reality was,
well, we don't own it. It's not our
land, but wouldn't it be nice if somehow
we could control what goes on that
property? And so that gets into the
discussion of maybe as things become
available, we can go ahead and take
control of some of that property and
actually uh put some of these really
neat plans in um in process. Uh you
know, we wouldn't be spending the money
to do any of the work. We'd have to get
somebody to do it. But um just you know
whether our own town owned land is
sufficient enough to handle the
development that we need is is another
question but just leaving it open for
the next 10 years to look at to
consider. So I mean that's we we got to
look at the POC as for the next 10 years
this is something we should be looking
into.
That's it. Thank you. Yeah.
Did you have something else?
No. Okay. And and again, uh you know,
Elaine, you're probably aware, you know,
we we tried putting a little money, a
token amount in the budget for uh you
know, open space funding putting aside
for that. And uh you know, so we were
looking at 50,000 board of select and
cut it in half. Board of Finance, you
know, cut the rest of it. I guess they
went back after we
uh moaned on that and uh you know, I
think what was it? 10,000 was the final
number. Correct. Yeah. So, uh I love the
thought, but
no, I know. I watched all those
meetings, Jed, and saw things were
getting cut.
Um, Andreas, you have any comments on on
it?
My my only, you know, thought processes
around the the ends, the hotels that you
guys thinking about bringing in, which I
don't think it's
hotels. Yeah. I mean, have have we
looked at some of the surrounding
motel, I would say performance or
vacancy or the type of people that maybe
even live in there. Um, have you? Yeah,
like the Talon. It's one of the highest
end places you could stay in
Connecticut. Yeah.
Talon in town. Yeah. Okay. But I mean,
you know, this like we're not talking
about Route Six motel. We're talking
about, you know, high-end tourism kind
of not not a motel, but an actual in
like, you know, given the opportunity,
you know, obviously we can put that in
the zoning. So, just to put it out
there, there's no official place to stay
other than somebody's house or an
Airbnb. Airbnb. Yeah. So, you know, if
we're going to try and attract tourism
to our town and get, you know, tourist
money, then be nice to have somewhere
for them to stay. And uh you know like
we could probably be pulling in people
that would have to stay near Yukon.
Yeah. Right.
So that's that's because it goes hand in
hand with it you know well we're going
to say hey come to Andover because it's
great to walk our trail but where are
they is there a campground or is there
you know not not yet. Um there is
provision for campgrounds in our current
rags but it's very small. So
that's a long process basically. Gotcha.
It's not something just let's just put a
a hotel inside the Route 6. Not like
putting in a road Hampton in something
small, right? Or even even a small one.
I It reminds me of one in Colombia. If
you drive there, it's just like
it's nobody there, you know. I never
seen, you know, but it's not that far
from here, you know. So there's there
definitely
just Yeah. No, that's that's good
questions. You know, like I know there's
a lot of ARMs on Columbia Lake. I mean,
I I see him that expensive, you know.
Um, for sure,
but I don't know what would the track
is, you know? I mean, yeah, we have the
Agent Orange, we have the trails, but is
that it's like a day trip kind of thing,
isn't it? Or do do you guys see any or
get any feedback as to people like, hey,
I really want to stay a week or a
weekend in Andover, or is this just
something that they stop by and Well,
people used to a long time ago and
that's what, you know, we revisited the
cottage industries. We revisit the
homebased businesses, the stuff that
worked here in the past, right? So, I
mean, I'm also campgrounds like I I I
always like KOAS and all that stuff. I
think they're great. You know, this
would be like it's nice, but you need
usually it's by a lake or something or
some kind of water. Yeah. the lake
association here. So, so I wouldn't
totally discount
[Music]
um using the trail to drive tourism. Um
because I've seen a bunch of examples
where that can work really well.
um you know and drive really big numbers
like the CNO trail coming out of
Washington DC is an example. National
Park Service says now that 100,000
people a year bike the whole length of
the CNO trail which is about 190 miles
and the average person spends five days
doing it. So, and the majority of them
are bed and breakfasting it and moteling
it, not staying in the campgrounds
alongside the trails. So, um, and having
seen the Hop River Trail and the
extension, the airline trail as part of
the East Coast
Greenway, we have an awesome asset.
We're just not really We're using it for
local
recreation, but you're not seeing a ton
of through recreation. And to get
through recreation, you need to
establish places for people to stay and
then enough trailside amenities that
they can get water and stuff like that.
Um, and I think that would be going
forward that's something the town's
going to have to look at whether that's
in the next 10 years or the next 20
years.
Um certainly as East Coast Greenway gets
completed, I mean many you know
uh I've talked to probably four through
you know through cyclists on the trail
in the last month. Um one big event this
past weekend.
Yeah. Saturday I think it was. Yep.
Okay.
Um, one Bill Penn local resident just
finished uh I think he's finishing in
Maine today or tomorrow. He just through
road from Key West to Maine. Um, and I
talked to four three other people that I
just randomly saw on the trail that were
doing the whole length of the majority
of it. So, it is coming. It's coming
slowly, I think, but it will be there.
and areas like Pennsylvania with a trail
called the Great Alagany Passage,
um you know, the Virginia Creeper Trail,
the Greenbryer Trail. A lot of
communities that have embraced have done
well with it. So, I think long term
that's something the town should
consider and I like I appreciate the
emphasis in economic development related
to trailside development. That's good.
I tend to think the the idea of a gin or
something more than just an Airbnb would
be useful just for us. I mean, I've got
family that want to come and visit, but
we don't have room anymore. And it's
like, where do we put them? Well, you
drive 10 miles that way to Well, you
drive 10 miles that way to Manchester to
get a place to stay. So, I think
something locally would really be good
for even the local residents. Then I
think the B&B would work better than
probably a hotel hotel in the area.
So that's a good small scale line. So we
do we do have that that so we we noted
in number seven if you can see that I
make it bigger that so we you know
working on the regulations to allow for
ins and larger beds and breakfasts. Um,
I don't know if we we want to have a
discussion of Airbnbs at this point, but
you know, certainly something a little
bit larger than an Airbnb, smaller than
a hotel, you know, is really the f is
kind of the butters on there. That's
right. Right. And I um had also
mentioned in the past, we've got a
unique uh situation where we've got the
Agent Orange memorial and there aren't
that many of them. So for veterans and
their families who want to come just pay
their respects, you know, just to see
it, it would be nice if there was a
little place that they could stay in the
area.
Okay. Well, I had I got quite a few
comments actually. I liked, you know, I
liked a lot of what's there, but I
uh I guess the the thought that I had is
I read through this with the action
items and and
so I'm almost reluctant to talk tonight
because I got my feelings hurt when I
read through all this stuff about the
zoning rigs. And Eric's probably got his
feelings have been hurt because he came
up with a wall. I didn't. I just uh here
but I thought most of the things that we
were suggesting changes to we probably
had covered in a couple of different
places in our ranks. And
so it it didn't surprise me that
economic development folks would look at
it and say zoning's the issue. I'm
sitting here to look at no zoning is not
the issue. We got that covered. We need
to get the people in here. We got you
property for sale right now and nobody's
coming in to develop it. So somewhere in
the middle of all that is probably the
truth and and there was a discussion
about working together and that would
make you know action item number 20
is maybe we should and I think quarterly
might have been too often there for a
while we were getting together and uh
you know
Eric the uh economic development
commission and
me just talking about things and and it
seemed like a lot of the things we were
talking about there, our regulations
covered it. It just takes a while before
you get familiar enough with it to
understand them to say, "Oh, yeah,
that's what that's all about." And we'll
we'll get into some of that a little bit
here. But I thought those meetings were
pretty good and helpful. Um, and we
should probably do it again. Maybe not
certainly not monthly, but at some
periodicity we we ought to do that. But
going right back up to the start in the
background, I was s I was surprised that
something in the background paragraph
did not talk about the lack of
infrastructure. And uh you know, we got
uh we've got two action items. one was
on high-speed uh internet or something
and and I thought, you know, my internet
at home was you blazing fast. So, I
don't know if we've got that one done or
not, but we've got another action to uh
consider
sewers and and again, I'm looking ahead
to the 824 referral and I'm looking for
something in here. It says economic
development's being hindered because we
don't have sewers.
And I don't know how true that is, but
it would at least give us something to
say consistent with the POC if we ever
were lucky enough to go that way. So I'm
sorry. So Jed, is your your position
that the town should be open to that
concept?
I think uh I think it should. I know
economic development thinks it should. I
uh I've heard that there was some
discussion about that with the board of
selectmen. Um, I think the cost is too
high. But if the state said or the
federal government said, "We're going to
pay to put sewers in so you guys can
build some affordable housing." Okay,
I'm good with that. I don't think, you
know, it's kind of it's kind of up there
with uh putting aside money for the town
[Music]
to have developable land. You know, I
think the survey we did, the town people
weren't all keen on that, and I keep
seeing evidence of that with the open
space funding stuff in that, too. Um,
money's tight, but but I wouldn't be
opposed to it. And, uh, okay, if if that
would help. I don't know if it would or
not, but I think that was the conclusion
that the economic development folks were
coming up with. And if that is, then it
should be in there. so that we can
reference it.
So do so we do have action item number
four is looking at small package and
alternative wastewater systems. Do we
want to be a little bit more broad about
that and and you know investigating
further down on your list there and
number six. Number six oh yeah there
I just want to be able to tie that back
to something in the discussion and says
we need it. So we're putting an action
to do it. Okay, got it.
The uh in the next paragraph down on
economic activity, I was pleasantly
surprised to to read that there are a
total of 228 businesses registered in
Andover. Um I thought that was a very
high cover. Uh pleased to see 28 new
businesses coming in 2024.
I went to the website to take a look at
the
uh listing that uh of of businesses in
the town there that
encompass most you know a lot of home
businesses and uh some of the bigger
ones too. Um I don't recall that I saw a
Dollar General on there. I know there's
a couple of So one of the action items
is update that update that listing. Um,
but where are the other, you know, there
was 82 things on on the list on the EDC
website? Where's the other 200?
Yeah. No, you're you're right, Jed. And
we are working on it actively. We do
have a new one that we're we're going to
be putting out very shortly that uh
encompasses a lot more. Um, we're also
breaking out the fat, you know, just the
people selling eggs, just the people
with the little farm stands, the people
with farms with the horses, things like
that. Um, you know, which don't normally
show up on like a business directory.
So, you know, but we are definitely
working on that. We know it needs work.
I didn't know where John got the 228
number. That was I know
that's a that's great news. I mean
that's almost
I think that's that's a secretary of
state number you know the number of so
it's you know so anyone that sets up an
LLC I think you know counts towards a
business okay in town so yeah but and so
we're going to add a note in there that
you know many of these businesses are
very very small you know homebased or or
what have you or small you know single
person LLC's or what have you but we'll
just as a note yeah I mean it's c
certainly nothing you would put on a
business directory or or go ahead and
put on Map Quest, you know, because it's
nothing that people would be visiting
going to, but there is an awful lot of
stuff going on in town that just isn't
going to show up on a business
directory. Okay. No, that's that's
great. One of the things that I am
trying to set the stage for and you
talked about it in here is the lack of
incubator
uh lack of facilities for when the home
businesses get a little bit too big for
being at home and they need to go to the
uh business parks and that kind of
stuff. And and so I said, "Well, if we
got 228 home businesses here, we need to
get those on our list because each one
has to give us 50 bucks a year, then
that uh we're we're missing some money.
But I do like the thought of having the
ability for when these businesses grow
to uh to have someplace to grow in and
uh and there
are there
are properties available that could be
used for
that. So I didn't necessarily agree with
the fact that we needed to identify more
properties. I thought we needed to get
somebody to come in and develop the ones
we have and and that would be a good
use, you know, and I
also like the thought that that housing
is its own economic development, you
know, and we didn't specifically
mentioned the senior housing, which we
have a specific
um section in our regulations to allow
the the more dense housing there. But I
think, you know, people wanting to stay
in Andover with uh, you know, downsizing
to the uh, smaller houses, smaller lots
is a great opportunity. And John, I've
got all these in the comments here. I
just didn't want to send them out
because I wanted to hear what everybody
else thought before um, I open my big
mouth there. Okay. Going back to the
economy, uh, the top industries chart
you had there.
Are all those jobs? Yep. Are all those
jobs in the
endover? No, they're back on page one.
Oh, okay.
That
chart. Those were all jobs that are
located in Andover.
I believe that's right. Because, you
know, I was again I I guess I was
shocked to see 304 government jobs in
Andover. We certainly don't have it
working here at the town
hall. Um, yeah, I didn't know if that
was like teachers, fire department. I
didn't know what all that was, but 55%
of them are state government. And I
thought that the rest of the the items
on that chart were probably all located
in town here. But when over half the
jobs are government jobs and half of
those are state government, that didn't
make any sense to me.
Yeah. So the
um chair there's Yeah. The and and my my
colleague Jeremy put these numbers
together and and he explained to me what
that what that means or total jobs.
Yeah. Total jobs within Andover. So
um that that 50 the share of industry
column has a different explanation that
I I need to get from Jeremy that we we
we discussed but I I can't remember how
to explain it. Um so like at the bottom
there where it says uh accommodation and
food service and then it said food
service and drinking places are
97% of the 32 there. Okay. I I thought
that was probably, you know, handover
pizza and donuts and that kind of stuff
here in town where 97% were almost all
of them are food. Not so much
accommodation because I don't know that
we got too many bed and breakfast.
Right. Exactly. There. But anyhow, that
government number just kind of
Yeah. So yeah,
unless there's Yeah. Unless it's
associated with gay city or or some
state, you know, state resource. Yeah.
And I think I think John, these aren't
necessarily these are the jobs that
residents hold. They don't necessarily
do Right. Yeah. Right. Exactly.
So, yeah. No, if you look at the because
the the number of jobs all these people,
1582 people leaving town to go work
someplace. Exactly.
Right. So there's Yeah. There's only
there's
there's you know there's less than 400
jobs in Andover itself. Yeah.
So yeah there are there are so there are
a number of people that working working
for the state in living in town. So
yeah, um
agriculture doesn't make a sector.
Um it's probably it. No, I mean because
that's that I would think I I my my
suspicion is that most of the people
making their money in agriculture in
Andover, that's not their primary
employment. that you know they they they
have other other sources of income that
you know the number of people that Yeah.
Especially if we're counting the guy
putting the egg stand out in front of
the house, right? Or you know I imagine
even if and Fitch you know Fitch
probably has a number of seasonal
employees but the number of actual
full-time employees working on their
their their
uh tree farms is pretty limited. I would
imagine
one of the things when we were talking
about you know the need Well, we'll get
there I guess.
Um, I didn't have any any comments on
page two. I guess uh you know on page
three where we got job counts by places
and it's got cities, CDPs, etc. I didn't
know what a CDP was. A census designated
place.
Say again. Census designated place.
Okay. If you want, we could we could,
you know, add that, too. But at least
give me a hint. I'm on looking it up. I
couldn't find anything when I was trying
to figure out what a CDP was. It's like
New Britain is a city. Middletown is a
city where Glastonbury center that is
qualified as a city. It's a
It's like like Rockville is a census
designated place within the municipality
of Vernon.
Okay.
[Music]
Um, so
we we say right below that, Jar,
currently the commercial share of the
grant list is just 3% leaving
residential property owners contributing
majority of the town revenue. Certainly
true statement. No, no thought there.
Um, you know, I thought we had had some
pretty good discussions by Eric of how
small the contribution to the town is
by, you know, something like Dollar
General and and so I don't know that
it's
ever we can ever
expect the development that we want in
town to significantly offset the the uh
grant list for what the residents are
doing. In my mind, the answer is, and I
don't even want a lot of this for the
town, but the answer is more residential
construction. That's that's our economic
development. Uh and we don't want to
get, you
know, we don't want to get clustered or
constrained or any of that kind of
stuff. But from what from what I heard
about the the revenue that Dollar
General was bringing in, I just don't
see where we're going to do that with
development. You know, I remember when
the Millstone Power Plant got built down
in Waterford. Wow. They couldn't spend
the revenue fast enough that they were
bringing it from that day. But, you
know, we're not going to bring Milstone
up here. We tried with the gas
infiltration plant and that didn't go.
Um they shut down
Milstone. They promised low electric
Yeah. uh bills and it ended up
backfiring because they're shutting down
just you know
had all kinds of issues. So you know it
wasn't even operational at one point.
Well it is
now for it. Yeah. But and but yeah, so I
don't I'm not convinced
that we've got the ability to grow the
brand list with the with businesses in
that. Um
I guess I feel like businesses aren't
necessarily develop the grand list, but
there are services for the people of the
town. So when we get more people here or
we look at the seniors in town, you
know, seniors growing population, what
are the the little shops that we can put
in to do that? I was just amazed when we
moved to town 20 years ago and there
wasn't a bank. Well, there was a bank.
Well, that was before my time, right?
Yeah. There was a hairdresser and it
failed.
There were some breakfast places and
they failed.
I think just never supported it
successfully. Everybody wants it. They
don't show up to keep their business
going. You got remember Route Six is a
is a artery. It's Yeah. People drive
through it. You know, you got that
little plaza on the side. It's How many
businesses have failed? The doughnut
shop was great. I loved it. Failed or
something else failed. You know,
it's not very appealing. I wouldn't
really pull in there. Yeah. You know, go
to Andover Pizza. That's about it. Not
the best pizza either. I want you to
liquor store. The liquor store liquor
store looks great. Yeah. I think the
pizza is pretty good decent, too. But um
things like over
Andover, that is a great little place.
Yep. And it's got its own little niche,
you know, it's different from all the
other stuff. And I think that kind of
thing is what's great. If we could get
more little things in town like that.
Well, I like, you know, in in er to have
the the Christmas tree farm scaling
down. You know, I I love that Christmas
tree farm out on Route 6. And I always
had this vision of some Hallmark
festival going on out there or
something. And uh we'll see we'll see
where we go on this agro tourism thing.
But
uh but I didn't see a chart in here and
I think it's in the last POC that would
that talked about what are the
businesses that contribute the most to
the town revenue. And if I recall on the
chart on the last POC, there were a
couple of private properties that were,
you know, in the top five or whatever.
And uh I I would just I thought it would
be helpful. Nowhere nowhere in this
report does it talk about the self-
storage thing which I think is probably
a thriving little business. I don't know
what it adds to us. doesn't have a lot
of employees but um okay but I was
looking for a chart on who who is
providing the most so that we have some
rationale for making a decision about
how
beneficial economic development would be
there.
Yeah. So the the old um the old uh town
profiles produced by what was used to be
CIRC and is now Advanced CT
um used to have the top five
um grand list contributors taxpayers. Um
their their municipal um
profiles no longer have that. So I mean
we could we could do a little digging on
it. I mean we could just ask the
assessor. I think that would be I think
when we talk economic development,
that's what you need to know. What do we
want to go get so that it brings the
biggest bang for the buck into the down?
There's got to be something that you
know the down will support too.
But that'd be that. Well, that's that's
always the rub is that the
buildings or the businesses that are
likely to make significant increases in
the grandest are not necessarily
businesses people want in their town.
Exactly. I mean, you could put a trash
energy plant, you know, in town. Um, and
it would bring in all kinds of revenue,
you know, um, but the residents would be
quite unhappy with you. Yep. Um,
yeah. So, from my perspective, I've
always thought things like lawyers,
doctor's offices, stuff like that would
would fit nicely. Yep. Um I the one
thing I would say about residential
development I would actually check the
numbers to see whether the tax taxes
from new res from res resident res
residential development is sufficient to
pay for
increase attendance at our schools.
Well, that's why I like the senior
the senior housing because I would say
it doesn't contribute to that and it
brings back in my old job, we used to
try to run statistics that that would
say town makes more money off open space
than it does a residents. The town
benefits more.
Now,
that's my old job was department of
agriculture. So, we maybe save things
like that, but yeah. Yeah. there they're
cost of community services studies um
sort of talk about that services a
resident
takes
I'm writing for page four I
think yeah right bel right right below
the uh the zoming thing that paragraph
there you know it it talks about
business zones allow certain uses
typically those thought to be less
intense by site plan review, others more
intense, special permit. No residential
uses are currently allowed in the
business zone. And it goes on, the
current regulations include a maximum
floor area of 15,000 square ft for
individual buildings and a maximum
50,000 square feet for shopping centers
in the Bzone. For reference, a typical
modern supermarket is approximately
40,000 square feet. And so,
um, you know, I
remember when the Dollar General site
plan review came to town and there was
nobody who was saying, "Oh, yes, we want
a bigger Dollar General with no
oversight." You know, every comment that
came in was, "How dare you guys allow
this store to come into town and not
have a special permit?"
That was that was my takeaway from that
experience. And and when we look at
50,000 square feet, like that's not big
enough, that's $5 generals sitting next
to each other in a row. And you know,
when we talk about these little doctor's
offices and that kind of thing, I I'm
not I'm hardressed to come up with what
a better number than a maximum of 50,000
square feet would be. I think it's I
think it's pretty reasonable number. I
kind of like the regulation that we've
got and I think it strikes a fairly good
balance. So, um
yeah, I don't think I don't think we're
casting I don't think we're we're we're
making a judgment call on that one.
We're just just noting it. Say again,
John. I don't I don't think this this
paragraph was was, you know, passing
judgment on the maximum square footage.
I think it just noted it. Well, it's it
certainly to me read we need to allow
bigger
development and that was a theme
throughout here, bigger development. And
I don't know that that's what the people
want. And
uh and as I say uh you know I don't know
how much
development in the 15 years I've lived
in Andover the only two I recall are
Dollar General and the gas infusion
plant and nobody wanted either of them.
You know Dollar General came in because
our our regulations allowed it but
people were thinking that you guys
screwed up the regulation there. That's
that should have been way smaller than
10,000 square ft or 15,000 ft to allow
these to come in with site plan. So
that's that's from the zoning
perspective pushing back. I know
economic development wants to economic
development, but I think you know I
think the numbers we got there are okay.
That's just my perspective. I guess we
can talk about that more. But that's
what I thought reading through there.
Same thing with the uh you the
industrial zone.
Um
you don't mention you do you mention the
mixed use? Oh, no. We'll get there.
We'll get there. So, okay.
Um the the last paragraph on that page,
the commission should review types of
businesses allowed. And I asked myself,
what
commission is that? The economic
development commission or is that the
planning and zoning commission? Oh, no.
No, I think yeah, I think planning and
zoning. I think yeah, that's Oh, see, I
thought it should be economic
development. They should become tell us
what kind of businesses we want and
we'll take a look at it, you know, and
and certainly we can work together on
that. But again, as I read through our
regulations, I think they're pretty
good. You know, I'm not that we might
need to tweak it a little bit. kind of
like adding the agro tourism piece
there. But I uh
quick question. Have we looked at
the personal experience? Right. I have
to drive 15 20 minutes to get that to a
grocery store. Dollar General does help.
It's cleaned. I tell them all the time,
you guys do a great job with that. Some
interesting characters that stop there.
Um besides that, another thing is going
to um
pediatrics. And we we we got lucky in
Heurn that we got a pediatric there but
before that I was driving a plane film.
So I really like that whole idea of
professional
um development here for lawyers,
pediatricians because if you want to
grow families here, you want to have
pediatricians coming coming in
here or you know visiting nurses um
association. I know there's one down
there maybe if you want to develop 55
and over.
I think it's going to be a hard cell
getting those guys to come here because
the population base here doesn't support
them like it does in Manchester, Glaster
Deberry, Will Manic, whatever. I think
parts of Heburn would support it, you
know, trickling down instead of because
we go to Hein now. Yeah. But if it can
kind of develop it here somehow and and
keep maybe, you know, certainly
certainly that is the kind of
development the people of the town want
here. Yes. Whether or not we support it
enough to keep them in business, that's
a different thing. You know, we all we
all want the small mom and pop hardware
store.
But the shoppers all go out to Home
Depot and they drive 15 miles and they
go five miles to
Heinard store. Okay. Anyhow, that's it.
Um that is true. And the other reality
is
today with the ability to buy from
Amazon and have things delivered in a
day and a half.
Um same day
small retail is getting harder is is
getting harder. Um,
yeah, that's one of the professional
things in there. Well, we brought over
and over and those nichy things,
antique, stuff like
that. But there again, it's it's how do
you how do you get them to I'm surprised
there's no breakfast places here. I
mean, that Bill's uh that little used to
be in Andover Plaza. Yeah, have fun. But
yeah, Tom's he'd grown and he's good.
Yeah. And he's got a nice car, so he's
he's probably doing good. But he has
good food. You have When you develop
something that's going to be a village
kind of like atmosphere and putting a
little diner in there. I think that
would attract people towards them,
especially locals. Um breakfast place
has always done good, but it's the
location, right? If it wasn't a rundown
plaza. Yeah, that was my problem with
that with that that place that was in
the plaza. I went there once or twice.
It was like, "Oh, this place is run
down. It was cold and it it just didn't
have a nice layout or vibe. So, that
turned Well, the parking lot was full of
potholes and you know, you don't want to
go in there. So, when you develop
something like that, you got to make
sure that you got nice shrubbery and
nice, you know, this we can walk around.
It was good on Thursday. It's Friday
night." Yeah. I mean the the the problem
is that the
economics of small strip malls are super
tough. I mean that's why you see so many
of them closing everywhere. You know
it's it's a and I don't think they're
you
know they're barely hanging on. I mean
their anchor tenant really is the pizza
parlor and the liquor store. And the
liquor store used to be where the
grocery store was, but you know, people
buy a lot more liquor than they buy food
from the local vendors. So, we'll see if
the full place will survive. Definitely,
you know, they do pretty good there, but
I don't in this town. Not sure.
Interested to to see a year from now.
Are they still there? Because, you know,
again, that's what that's what the
people of the town want, but you got to
go support it if you if you really want
it. saying what you want, doing doing
two different things. But another
observation, the dance school right
there, I've seen a lot of cars, you
know. So that's I mean there's an
appetite for that small families with
kids, something like that, right? Maybe
a gymnast area to develop or swimming,
you know, on that one. No, you can't.
And Amazon too was getting a bad record
just right off the road two miles from
here. There was a guy who delivered his
Amazon stuff. Took a picture of it and
stole it right was right on camera. So
that's starting to hit locally. Wow. So
people going to get turned off soon.
Um the Amazon driver the driver three
miles from here. But in in terms of the
size of buildings,
um I think I'm probably the only person
here that was on the zoning commission
when those limits were established. And
that was specifically to prevent, you
know, intrusion of big box stores into
town. Not that I thought it was likely
that we were going to do it, but clearly
the residents didn't really want that.
Um so that's what that was. those limits
were established to kind of prevent
anything bigger than say a Highland Park
market. Yeah.
Yeah. And I don't know how many square
foot Highland Park market is, but you
know that that is a nice kind of story.
I think it's about equivalent to the
size of Dollar General. Maybe a little
bit bigger than that.
If you look at South Glenburg, there's a
little uh grocery store there that does
really well. it own my respective family
and it's inside park there at the corner
high
south that's a different name yeah
different name but very small I used to
live there so at 17 yeah it's
similar to this town and it's a little
bit richer but oh I know what you're
talking about that's right from uh the
coffee place coffee place yeah right
there something like that
okay well I'm going to Move down to the
top of page five and it's got the
commission again should consider levels
of review required for each zone and I
think that's probably planning and
zoning
commission. Um the very yeah the very
first word there is commission and
should be PCC.
Let's see. We talked about uh you know
in that same paragraph likewise there
may be uses more suited to site plan
approval with certain provisions which
may be easier to obtain for some
applicants. Uh again the feedback from
the Dollar General experience was the
people at town are happy to have a
voice. I guess you that's consistent
with uh you know we tried doing some
charter changes to
uh take that that were perceived to take
away some of the voice of the town
people and and they didn't like that
they were they want to have their say
and uh I think they want that with these
stores that coming in
too. Um, next paragraph down, the
opportunity for the town to capitalize
in need of small incubator spaces as
well as need for contractor storage main
warehousing through the adoption of
regulations allowing for mixed use
commercial industrial buildings and
working with established developers
market. The town could see grant lift
list growth while allowing new
businesses to establish themselves
others to grow in
place. I think our regulations allow
that now. I I don't know why that would
be what the hindrance is to that. And
yeah, in fact, do we've got the mixed
use thing that would allow us to put
housing on top of some of those offices
and that kind of stuff, which you know,
we we have there too. So, I think the
zoning rates
are if they need a tweak, I'm not aware
what it is yet.
the people who care. Yeah, I think
that's right. I and I think Yeah, I
think this is and and Jeremy had gone
through of those. I think maybe some of
those was a
interpretation about a certain
particular type of development, but I'll
we'll we'll go back and review that and
make sure that they that they they they
fit what we were looking at. Yeah. And I
I also want to pipe in on that because
the dance hub was mentioned and I know
the dance hub they they don't have
enough space there at Andover Plaza. to
to do their business. And Stephanie
wants to expand. Um, but if you have
more of a, you know, I'm calling it a
warehouse or an open space kind of
building for a dance hall.
That's the kind of stuff, you know, as
opposed to just incubator space, but
just an an uh a space that will allow a
dance studio with space to go ahead and
do that because I hate to say it, but I
think Stephanie's going to have to leave
town to expand her business. And that
would, you know, I know the town of
Ander would be very sad to see that
happen. So, this is a lot of why we're
bringing up, wouldn't it be nice if we
had this kind of space for something
like that to move into. That's all. And
we got a couple of those properties on
the market now. We just can't get a
developer in to build those things. And
and I think the uh you know small
um business park models, you know, to
allow these home businesses that are
growing kind of like the dance studio
there. Um we've got a market for them.
We just can't I I think we have a market
for it. Yes. We convinced any developer
to take the risk on putting something in
place to do it. But the properties
available
It's too bad we don't have like a big
mill. Yeah.
Well, put in to make apartments out of
all that kind of stuff. We have nothing.
Breweries were coming. Yeah.
Um, we talked about feedback the Dollar
General wanting wanting less sight plan
approval.
Um yeah, there is an old brewery in this
Willy Brewchester.
Well, yeah. Willie Brewer, there's a
couple other ones that are popping up.
It's very popular.
Farm breweries are
so plant some hops and call it a farm
and put a brewery in there.
Next paragraph down, we talked about uh,
you know, the economic development
business directory and listing of
businesses, which I think is great. I
just think, uh, you know, it needs an
update and maybe there could be an
action to, uh, do
that.
Uh, yeah, coming down, and I think we've
already got the action item here. The
planning zoning commission should
continue to have active dialogue with
EDC in an effort to continue to make
improvements to the regulatory
environment to encourage the growth of
business in Andover. And that was that
uh
EDC
BCC town manager little meeting that we
had there. But again, I I'm not I'm not
aware of anything that's not coming to
town because our regulations wouldn't do
it and the people wouldn't want
it. So again, I thought the regulations
weren't the problem. I don't know what
the problem is for sure, but our
regulations support doing pretty much
what we want to do. So if a developer
wants to if we can present them, hey
these businesses are looking for
expanded space like the dance school and
maybe a brewery wants to come in into a
a big bigger building, right? Present
that to the developer and say these
businesses are ready to sign up to you
know for bigger space. So you know here
it is. If we can put something like that
together y and present it to the
developer I think that would be that
would go well. And and so two, for
instance, is there, you know, when we uh
when Ryan Fitch first put the Christmas
tree on this side of uh Route Six for
sale, you know, we got together with him
and we talked about mixeduse development
and all this kind of stuff that would be
perfect in there. I don't know you that
it ever went any further than that. The
uh the other example is over at Lyn Home
Corners. There's a bunch of property
right on Route 6 that we paid great for
mixed use development. The guy uh you
know came talking to us a couple of
times and when it finally you know we
said okay you know yes let's pursue this
and go out do it never heard from the
guy
again and so the property is there we
just we need something else but I don't
think it's changing the zoning rigs. I
think the zoning rigs are pretty uh okay
now. Maybe, you know, and I worry about
me being too can't see the forest or the
trees because I've been in the in the
trees so long there now, but I really
think that uh you and it took me a while
to figure out how to use these things
like the excuse floating zone, but I
think I think our regulations have a lot
of flexibility that we're not taking
advantage of.
What I look at the map here of
the business and the industrial zones
and it's just all around along Route
Six. Yet, we've talked about having like
the village zone thing that would be
more like maybe Center Street or
something down 316 and that the zoning
there doesn't apply for that. Doesn't
allow for it. We have village zone
identified already next to library. Oh,
next to library. That's not on that map.
No, it's not. Um, so I'm wondering
whether we need to do something with the
zoning regs. Well, the except for the
firehouse property, the rest of the
property in on it's on center street
there in all 16 is already houses. Yeah.
So, they'd have to be converted, which
he did address. But you know that when I
first was on economic development 10
years ago, we were we wanted to find an
area of town where we'd have a business
park that doesn't need commercial
signage and it's not retail businesses,
you know, like like the stuff we've been
talking about a lot of this night. It
doesn't have to be on Route Six. No. And
so that's why it's we're just putting it
in there like we've recommended, hey, we
we want to find a spot where we can have
these things where it doesn't have to be
on Route Six because that's prime real
estate for
bigger and better things or nicer houses
or or whatever, you know, like but I
think the corridor, you know, coming
down Long Hill
Road across Route Six and down 316 right
in that across circle around that spot,
you know, and but we need to do
something about the zoning because that
doesn't leave six otherwise. So, and
that, you know, that gets back into this
project that we're Wayne and I and Eric
worked on quite a bit uh with John.
Okay. I don't know who else is in that
mix. Roberta, I guess. Yeah, she's got a
big piece of that pie is we're trying to
one get the map accurate. Then two,
we're going to look at where does it
make sense to, you know, change the zone
so that we can do this. And if there's
not an action, if there's not an action
to update that map, you know, that's one
of the big actions that that should come
out of here is is to uh reook at making
sure that we've got the town zone the
way we want it to to execute that plan.
Right. So So what's the plan on if you
are going to move the town garage if um
up to the you know recycle station? What
what are you going to do with that area
right there? Well, so I'll let Eric
answer that because that's a certainly
land at 50,000 feet. It looks like a
great plan. I know money is an issue in
uh anything else you want to say about
that, Eric,
other than flood plates and remediation.
Yeah, I get that. I mean, you got to do
environmental remediation. You got all
those businesses that exist now in stuck
along Route Six that you're going to
have to take by imminent domain if you
want to carve that whole area out and
make it some sort of village district.
So you're going to throw out Duba,
you're going to throw out the post
office. Um I assume you'll keep the
transit station where it's at. Um and
you're going to throw out those other
two houses there. Take them all by
imminent domain if you if you're really
serious about that. You got to relocate
the public works garage. That's a $6
million$8 million hit to the town. I
don't know how you're planning on
getting people to agree to that. I think
that's about zero chance. Um, which was
my objection when LAA proposed that plan
in the first place now 15 years ago.
Um, is it all doable? Yeah, there's
nothing physically that you couldn't do.
Um, probably you'd end up doing
brownfield
remediation for public works. Probably
more likely for the garage that's there
cuz I know when that was Marty's service
station, he dumped all his waste oil
down the back hill behind the facility.
So, I'm sure that's that whole thing is
contaminated.
Um, you know, could it be done? Yeah.
But most of that's in the 100redyear
flood plane. So, what kind of things are
you going to put in there? Um, number
one. Two, it's a fairly ecologically
sensitive area. Um, because you do have
a threatened turtle species, you have a
threatened snake species, and you have a
threatened bat species all coated
located right there. So, it's possible,
but there's an enormous number
environmental constraints. Um, and then
obviously huge financial constraints.
So, so my I guess my question is if and
I don't know if you guys are planning on
moving that garage somewhere else. If
you're not, that's great. But if you
are, I'm more for restoring it to its
natural like kind of like more like a
park kind of environment versus
developing and taking people's property.
So, I mean that that's I I thought that
there were some plans moving.
a lot of things. You could build you
could build some kind of uh you know
dense housing as dense as we can do over
there that's you know really nice
location by the Hob River and all that
close to uh close to the church the
library and all that easy trip across
the street to come down to to this area
here. I'm certain a small professional
thing something in there would make
sense but I mean even even you know
developing into like a park the river's
right there would be nice if money was
no
issue that'd be a great plan but you
know more and more I see money is a big
issue and I just I don't see I don't see
us ever getting there
the I the plan of conservation
development is a is a decent place for
for big ideas whether or not they're
immediately realistic. I won't say we
shouldn't put it there. That is a big
idea and it's a good idea. Is it an
achievable idea? Yeah, it's I don't know
about that one. But you could talk about
the B the former B property on the north
side of Yep. the north side of river
that connects Long Hill and Booker Hill
and then call that Stoker Brock since
he's the guy that owned those
days. But yeah,
you can dream at least seem like this
kind of a plan here is place where you
put some of your dreams and then
eventually maybe you'll get somebody
that can do it. I remember in West
Harvard when I was living there, there
was two car dealerships that had were in
this big area below Main Street and it
was just don't be looking and there
wasn't much of anything going on.
Developer came in and built a whole blue
back square area with all the apartments
and the offices and the restaurants and
all sorts of things. And you wouldn't
believe they could have put something
like that in there, but they did.
So if you get the right person someday,
that's why I didn't make the comment
that we should strike that one. You
know, I I think, you know, it's it's a a
grand vision. I don't know if it's an
achievable goal. May not be achievable
now, but maybe someday keeping handle
beautiful is also important. Yeah, it
is. Restoring that area. It's a it's a
it's an eyesore to me driving by there.
I know the town, but you know, it's
expensive to get it. Yeah, it is. Makes
sense what Eric said. Have you ever seen
a public works garage that looked
pretty? Yeah, man.
This is an old one. I get it. It's just
going to be Glassberry probably has a
nice
looking challenges and
opportunities. There need There is a
need to pursue options for maintaining
business in town rather than make them
needing to relocate due to this lack of
sufficient space. I strongly agree with
that and uh I think our zoning rigs
would allow that to
happen. Says the desire points to real
need to create additional industrial and
commercial land. Limitation of building
sizes within the Bzone could be a
hindrance to growing industries forcing
them to look for space outside town. I I
disagree. I think I think we do have
space. I think we have it zoned. I think
we can change zoning if we need to, but
I think there's there's property
available right now. Problem is nobody's
coming in to develop them.
Who who talks to these developers by the
way?
Tony or there are two prime prime pieces
right on those six. Yeah, that would be
sitting there. That would be an Elaine
question. Uh then and I know there's a
goal to do that whether or not we you
know we haven't got there yet. Again,
you got to have there's a lot of stuff
going on that I'm not that I'm not the
person to talk to about. Okay. Elaine,
you got anything you want to add to that
at this point?
Um certainly, it's funny because I'm
sitting here going, "Oh my god, I'm in
an EDC meeting tonight." You know,
because I'm just listening to the
conversations that you guys are having.
um and all these ideas being and that
and that is what our meetings are like
you know that's what we discuss um we do
have um biatamsky is a um a realtor I
also am a realtor she has discussions
regularly with developers
um so all we've been for you know
looking forward to is having the POC to
support are continuing to discuss with
developers things that we need and to go
ahead and show that you see our next
10-year plan basically is supporting
this kind of idea. Okay. So, this is
what we like. So, that's you know so it
all goes hand in hand. Um you know but
that is the thing that we are constantly
looking at. We we definitely would like
those particular spots to have similar
things that we've been talking about.
The incubator, the the you know the the
little larger space buildings so that
our dance studio can just move across
the street over there. Um things like
that. Um so we you know we're we're
constantly doing that. But um if we have
an idea of what the PL how town would
like to
see then that's when we can show the
developers this is what the town is
really interested in seeing happen you
know over over the next 10 years. So
that's you know it all goes hand in
hand. Um, yeah, it it it does get
frustrating talking about this stuff
because we're talking pie in the sky all
the time, but at the same time trying to
figure out where we can get the rubber
to meet the road and actually have
something happening to these properties
that we don't own as town,
right? Yeah. I mean, first thing comes
to mind is you guys should just have a a
small little fair for the residents and
have some posters made and stuff like
that like, hey, we're thinking about
this. What do you guys think? Give us
some feedback. And then we can take that
to the developers, invite them to a
little charade, you know, and say, "Look
what we can offer you guys. If you come
in here, this is what the residents
wants. We have a nice these all the
members presented that way." Yeah.
And that is something that happened 15
years ago with the LAA plan that came
out and it talked about the village
node, which is why we're all talking
about the village node because it came
out of that whole study. and this vision
of, you know, moving the public works
garage out of that area so we can go
ahead and develop along the river there,
um, and have mixeduse things going on in
that little area. Um, are all stemmed
from that idea. Um, and I know when
they, you know, I was on that
commission, it was, you know, we were
working with Bolton in Coventry and, uh,
Andover and Colombia, the four towns
together along the Route 6 corridor, and
that information is still out there. Um,
but every once in a while, we see that,
you know what, that was a pretty good
plan. Let's keep a a vision of that that
whole village node idea that if we had
all the money in the world, this is what
we would like to see. And that's and
that's why and that and it still peppers
our conversations today. Um and we don't
want to lose sight of them. So, um we
definitely want to continue on with the
conversations because eventually ideas
turn into something,
right?
Okay, I'm ready to go to page
six.
Um, please page six. I've uh mine's
probably talked a little bit, but right
down below that 8-2 chart, there's a
paragraph and it talks
about even if the commission is not
interested in a village district, it
should consider creating a mixeduse zone
for the area around Long Hill
intersection and perhaps other areas.
mixeduse development could spur the
creation of groundf flooror commercial
space while allowing building owners to
create rental units on upper floors
helping to stabilize buildings
profitability. I couldn't agree more and
our our regulations allow it. And so,
and again, maybe I'm looking at it from
a tainted lens on the other side of the
uh object from
EDC, but it looks like you're looking
for the planning and zoning commission
to maybe change the regulations. And I
think the regulations are in place,
ready to go. Uh we just need somebody to
come in and work with us about doing
something.
Yeah, I I I agree, Jed. Yeah, we'll
we'll I'm shifting a lot of this this
language to to be more about promoting
and and and um applying the mixed use
rags rather than rather than creation,
obviously. Whoops, I accidentally muted
you. Sorry, I I meant to mute myself. I
I muted you guys.
What?
Thank you. Sorry about that. Yeah, I got
you. Sorry about that. I think the one
thing you could consider and it's
something we considered back when we did
the original mixed use floating
zone was to say, "Okay, it's not going
to be a floating zone anymore. We're
going to apply it right from the
beginning for this area and this area
and this area um and just set it in
stone and make that zone change." Now,
uh the problem is is that that
changes the things that people can do
now in that zone to something new. Yeah.
So, you're going to make some people
really unhappy with that. Whereas now
with it as a floating zone, any
applicant that comes to you with a piece
of
property that is within the area
encompassed potentially by the floating
zone can say, "Hey, reszone me to a
mixeduse zone. Here's the site plan.
Here's here's the site master plan."
Boom. Commission says, "Yeah, that looks
great. Now it's zoned."
So, and and maybe maybe the action here
is
We need to work with the Economic
Development Commission to explain what
that how that mixed zone works. You
know, I've listened to Eric talk about
it for five years now and the light bulb
is finally starting to come on just a
little bit. And so it doesn't surprise
me
that when people, you know, aren't using
the regs all the time that it doesn't
make a lot of sense on how that's
supposed to go. But I think the
regulations are there. We just need to
the regulations are there and the way I
understand it is that the the floating
mix zones really just apply for six.
Is am I mistaken on that area? I mean
that go
it could be anywhere in town
technically.
No, no, it was originally designed to
sit over pretty much the entire route.
Then when I came back to planning and
zoning now and and and started going
back to EDC, what what we realized
quickly is that those areas are
shrinking because of the 100red-year
flood planes increasing number one.
Number two, we have higher standards for
environmental awareness and trying to
keep the areas clean. So like we're
we're looking to pull in, you know,
developers, but where they can do what
we have proposed is going to be great in
our town. Those areas have shrunk,
number one. Number two, they're
shrinking faster and faster. So that's
why the the the it's not pressure, but
the the directive that we kind of
focused on this time is we need to
really nail it down. Not like you can
only do it here, but these are really
the best spots so that the developers
know as the properties come up for sale
or if the town someday buys properties,
etc. or uses their own property that we
can say, "All right, yeah, yeah, yeah.
These are the best spots because we
don't want to put something way on the
edge of town that's going to be we want
it to be linked to the sound center and
all the the walkable trail, you know, we
but we don't want to
be, you know, so it's it's a it's a
weird balance in my opinion.
And it's hard to explain to developers.
Oh, well, yeah, this is what we want,
but uh we don't know where you put it.
You know, it's right, we should have
that. That's Yeah, we got to really I
can't correct it. I even have it
highlighted designated business or
industrial. Yeah, at this particular
moment, but we're just proposing it
like, hey, maybe we can look into this
like find the best spots and go and and
that's again part of that action to take
a look at the map. Where do we want
right to have business zone so that we
can do that better? Right. Right. I
don't know. Maybe you could put on the
map some sort
of reference to mixeduse zone is
possible in business and industrial
zones.
How much how much outreach is done
to I don't know organizations or you
know professional organizations
that do this sort of stuff build these
things create these um senior housing
developments. Do they even know that?
Hey, we're sitting right here. We're
we're 30 minutes from Hartford probably
don't know. No, I mean to do that you
have to do what Coventry did years ago,
which is hire an economic development
person,
you know, and have them go out and pound
the pavement trying to bring business
into town, right? Um, and we've never,
you know, we as a town have always liked
the idea of economic development. Yeah.
But think about it. Our economic
development commission budget, what is
it up to now? $1,000 a year for economic
development.
13 what? Well, yeah, it's we have
$1,000, but we did get a kick to go
ahead and pay for the second welcome to
Andover sign this year. Oh, yeah. That's
that's just that was a single allocation
for a son, right? Um, you know, it's
something that the town has always
wanted to pay lip service to, but the
town has never wanted to fund. And
that's okay. Um, so the grand vision out
there at least where I thought you know
probably two years ago Elaine and I went
to board of selectmen and made the pitch
for a combined town planner economic
development
coordinator
and didn't get rate reviews. We didn't
get tomatoes thrown at us, but uh
finances
were not all that great, but we did
through the plan of conservation of
development action get a town planner.
Yeah. Now, wouldn't it be great if when
the plan of conservation of development
gets done, we can expand John's role to
focus more on economic development and
still keep him here. Um, I think that
would be a wonderful achievement of what
we set out to do a couple years ago, and
we might be able to actually bring that
to fruition without anybody even know it
happened. That would be great. Wouldn't
that be great? Yep. Yep. So, that's what
I think our
plan that's what we kind of need to get,
you know, heading towards
uh as long as John would be amenable to
uh to that. But that that's always been
kind of my dream to uh to expand that
way and once we got done with PCD to
expanded to doing more of the economic
development kind of stuff with us. Yeah.
Yeah. Once we've written that once we've
written the plan, it's time to uh
implement it.
Yeah.
No. So, I could
always try and lean on our state
representative, a state senator to slip
something into the budget
implement. That's how things get done in
Hartford.
Okay.
Y not smart enough to do that. Not smart
enough to know about that. I do know
that it takes more outreach and I do
know that Elaine is already way
overextended and so that's not a doable
new, you know, to to criticize the fact
that that hasn't actually come to
fruition yet. You know, that's not the
intention here. Um, but I do think that
with John's help, maybe uh, you know,
next year we could start dabbling in
some of that stuff and maybe get
somebody to bring something here.
Yeah, that would be good. And I don't
care. Well, I think the mixed use would
be great with the, you know, the places
for the industrial park and office
building to help low and housing up on
top.
Um there in the aims and objectives for
grand list, supporting cottage
industries by allowing types of
development that they require is
important. And again, I uh I left asking
what what support do they need? I I
think from a zoning
perspective, I don't know what we would
need to do there. You know, cottage
industries are allowed, home businesses
are allowed, and we don't have places
for them to grow into yet. We need to
somehow get those here. But I don't
think there's a a planning and zoning
piece of that that I'm aware of.
Then the you know the next paragraph
down there town should consider you J
squeaking on it now the creation of
larger mixeduse buildings to encourage
creation of equate airspace all that uh
including contract
I I don't know who has the action to do
that but I think our regulations
uh support getting that
And my last comment is on the action
items. We need to identify who's got the
lead for each of those things.
Otherwise, when we we come to the next
10 years, we'll go back and look at that
list and we'll say, "Oh, I thought you
were doing that." And
so we need to make sure we know who
Sorry, J. Yeah. No, that so at the at
the end of this at the end of this
process, we will we will have an
implementation matrix that will will add
those details to each of the
implementation items, each of the action
items. So that that that is that is that
is planned. We will have that.
So again, you know, my comments are not
to say that the write up was bad. It's
very good. You know, as Elaine and
Patrick both said, you know, we finally
got all these things written down on
paper, which I think is great. Um, I was
trying to look at it and it seemed like
it was thinking that planning and zoning
may have a big part of why these things
aren't happening. I'm not sure that
that's true, but if there's if there are
things where we need something different
and and maybe, you know, placing the
flip mixeduse floating zone so it's not
floating anymore to plunk some place,
maybe that's something we need to to do.
uh your comment about the shrinking
thing because of the uh the flood planes
growing. Yeah, good one. I I hadn't
considered that. Um but I do think it's
very important and
uh but I did think that you know I
pushed back on a couple of things and
that's probably to be expected because
I'm looking at it from the other side
that economic development is looking at
it from. So, not to be critical, trying
to be collaborative, trying to provide
some good constructive feedback to get a
good product there.
And that was the end of my comments.
That was That's great.
That's great.
So, I will send you the the draft that I
wrote up with all my little comments in
it, John, just so you can
kind of and and and I'm certainly
willing to accept push back on in any of
those comments. I just wanted to provide
what I thought as I was reading through
the the thing here.
Yeah, that's that's fantastic. That's
why we do this.
Um and so I guess that uh what's what's
the next step here? Are you going to do
another
tweak on it uh just based on what you
heard tonight and uh
Yep. Um so yeah, that's exactly right.
We'll we'll in the we'll make these
edits over the next couple weeks. So if
someone um had some comments that they
didn't get to or your your thoughts Jed
prompted someone else to to have some
considerations, if you could forward
those to me um ideally in the next week
or so uh we'll make edits and and
distribute it again. Um but what we will
propose to do um is we we've done a
bunch of discussion about housing over
the last couple of uh years and have an
existing affordable housing plan. So we
will use those to draft up a housing
chapter for the next uh for for in
advance of the next planning and zoning
meeting in addition to making edits as
as discussed to this chapter.
Okay.
John, do you have any feelings based on
the study that finally came out
uh on each municipality share quote
unquote of affordable housing whether
that's actually going to get through the
legislature?
Um yeah, it's interesting. So, the final
fair share report, which is certainly
not anywhere close to being a law, um
was released, I believe, yesterday. And
I I I haven't gone through it yet. I'll
be honest.
Um, I do think that the fair the fair
share
um requirement that that potentially
converting the affordable housing plan
that towns already have to do into
something like a fair share plan has a
puncher's chance this year. Um I I have
it on decent authority that the majority
leader has is putting together sort of
an omnibus um housing bill um that I
think fair share will be included in. I
do think that that that provision will
probably get the most objection and and
be the subject of the most horse trading
and debate on the the legislative floor.
But I I think it's got a puncher's
chance.
um which would which would create a
whole a whole new series of targets for
every town to incorporate into their
into their affordable housing plan.
So just so that everybody knows the
their targets depending on which formula
you use to generate them for Andover is
the addition of somewhere between
226 and
72 new affordable housing units in the
town of Andover. Um, and considering we
only have 1,200 housing units now, I
don't think that's a uh
uh reasonably attainable goal. That's
right. After we move the parking
garage, right? And again, so what the
what the what but to be clear, what the
legislation states, the draft
legislation, is that the only thing that
the town actually needs to do is create
the the regulatory environment and
conditions that would enable it. It, you
know, it doesn't require the town to
build anything.
Um, so it's it's it's more about
removing obstacles and as as Jed said,
the town has already, you know, done a
fair bit of of regulatory changes that
that would enable a variety of
development to happen. Um, so you know,
it the market you know the town can only
do so much. The market needs to do most
of it.
Um so you know that's that is
um you know again it's it's it's it's
not about necessarily building things.
It's about about sort of preparing the
regulatory environment to allow for
building things. Uh but yeah it's it's I
think some of the numbers are a little
bit unrealistic given given market
conditions.
Yeah. I think 700 new affordable housing
units in the town of Andover would be
problematic. Yeah. Probably put my house
up for sale and move.
Anything else? Uh, Eric, we didn't call
on you specifically. You've been chiming
in a little bit along the way here.
Anything else you want to share on the
EDC chapter there? No, I I I think
you've hit on most of the parts. I mean,
the only thing I want to keep is that I
always think of economic development as
the primary goal is to get the
businesses and services that Andover
residents
want that are that you can do at a
smaller scale which the population can
support in New Andover. You know, in I
think of economic development as much
for convenience and for driving
community as I do for reducing the mill
rate. Because when you really look
at the quantity
um and size of businesses it would take
to make a measurable
dis rate.
[Music]
um you would really alter the character
uh of Andover and not necessarily in a
good way. So, I don't think that that's
an attainable goal. I mean, it sounds
great. I mean, I'd love to pay less
taxes, too. I mean, I'm sure all of us
do, but I think it's more important for
to be able to have the services that you
want locally. Um, and that should really
be kind of the driving goal. At least
that's my opinion.
Okay, thanks Eric. Uh, John, did you
have anything on the conservation
chapter update?
Uh, no. I we we've been getting feedback
from the conservation commission and I
have sort of a markup version that we're
discussing back and forth. So, we should
have a sort of a a agreed draft um
shortly. Okay.
Um, I'm going to spend just a couple of
minutes. The next item is discussion of
bylaws changes
and and there is some I'm I'm gonna
check out guys.
Thanks. Yes. Thank you so much. Thanks
for Thanks for coming. Okay. Bye. Bye.
Let me be perfectly honest. I'm going to
check out of that discussion. Okay.
Yeah. You don't care if watch the
question. No. Thanks for coming here.
Cheers.
Thanks for all your hard work everyone.
John, hopefully you can
display the bylaws with Mark Branch's
comments. And page one looks pretty
easy.
Nothing there. Okay. Page
two. And
uh so Mark Franc's comments don't show
up there. He had uh you know when we're
talking about what to do with
um
vacancies, he said, "Is this per the
ordinance? If not, we have to follow the
ordinance." and it was sort of by the
ordinance, but I did change it. I took
the words directly out of the ordinance.
Well, not the ordinance. It's out of the
charter. There was nothing in the
ordinance there. So, that
uh I updated the words to make it
reflect exactly what's in the town
charter with as far as replacing people
with vacancies there. Okay. Can Can you
see the full markup now, Jed? Yeah, we
can.
Yeah, it's small enough that probably
nobody can read it, but that's okay. It
reminds me to uh talk about what I want
to say and not drag it out all night
there. Um, the next comment that Mark
had was
uh, you know, about the chairperson and
the vice chairperson being a commission
member. Then,
uh, I left it I left it the way it was.
I thought it was clear enough.
Obviously, an alternate shouldn't be the
commission chair because he's not going
to be seated all the time and you got to
be seated all the time to be the chair
and so that makes it uh you know a
regular member
there. Well, I guess looking at your
screen and
uh I did include the word regular just
to remove any doubt there. So, yep, you
did. I've got
uh maybe I don't have the most recent
thing or what I checked on, but uh
anyhow, we'll we'll press on and uh
they're all pretty easy comments here.
The uh the next comment that Mark Grant
had was at the bottom of the last page.
It talked about the board clerk being an
employee of the town and he said uh it
doesn't have to be. And so, you know, we
we so that was a that was an original
one. It's going to be the land use clerk
doesn't have to be an employee of the
town. So, we we crossed out the board
clerk has to be a salaried employee of
the town because she is not. And
uh and that's that. So, on to the next
one. Land use department administrative
assistant. Mark asked. Well, you know,
the board clerk's not a employee of the
down outsourced thing. How about the
land use administrative system? Could be
not necessarily so necessly the best
idea, but does not have to be an
employee of the town. So, I just
eliminated those words
there. A couple of uh change mark, you
know, cross that acceptment process in
there.
Um, I don't think he had anything for
shattering on any of
the next things
there. Section three, the zoning
enforcement
officer. Again, uh you know, Mark's
comment was he doesn't have to be an
employee of the town. He could be a uh
you know, John provides CEO
responsibility for a couple of towns.
So, we could be doing that if we wanted.
I like having Wayne an employee of the
town, but not required. And so, we we
chose to make it so that it didn't have
to be that way.
That's it on that page.
Let's see.
Okay. Yep. And uh Mark's comment was uh
that we should be consistent about
saying commission. Sometimes we were
using PZC in there. Just be consistent
and uh say commission
throughout. Think anything else
there? Um moving down to
election of
officers. Uh he was said, you try to
make it a little more clear whether or
not you're talking entire membership or
just the regular uh commission members.
And so I added the word uh entire in
there.
down. I'm on page six
now. Section four, we tweaked that just
a little bit to be
uh you know to talk about when you can
deliberate following a public hearing
and uh that sort of thing.
the section
five, you know, we used to say if you
missed uh missed meetings for reasons
other than illness, uh we were going to
do away we changed it to say unexcused
absence. There could be a lot of
personal family reasons that somebody
would be unable to make the meetings and
so that makes that just a little bit
clearer. Uh section 10 uh he
uh he said that
were Robert's rules orders never
designed for government agencies and
contain provisions that are flatly
illegal. You can be guided by them but
don't ever want to be governed by them.
And so we put Robert's rules of words
shall be used as a
guide. Moving down the next page,
uh the minutes. Oh, so section six. how
you know we I forget what we used to
have in there but we talked about
updating the minutes you know and uh
they would be made on the copy that's
filed with the town clerk and initial by
the secretary and a bunch of stuff that
we don't do. Uh what we do do is when we
approve the minutes it's the the changes
to the minutes are noted in the
following months. So when you look at
minutes, you look for when they're
approved to see if there are any changes
to it. And that's the process that the
town uses. And that's what I tried to
reflect in
there. I think uh so Mark added a new
section article new article 19 conflict
with applicable law. He put some new
boiler plate in there that you know say
that our bylaws can't change the state
statute. State statutes supersede uh
anything that we do
here. And then on the amendments, uh the
changes, um just to make it clear that
the
uh entire voting membership, everybody
votes on changes to the
bylaws. And I think I think that's it.
That's uh changed from the last time we
went through here. I would make a motion
to approve the bylaws as
amended. with the second and seconds.
Any discussion on the bylaws?
Hearing none, I'll call for a vote. And
hi, Leanne.
I
Andreas I. Patrick I. And I vote I as
well. So the uh motion passes five
0 but the majority of the entire
commission is five members. So, we got
just enough members to pass the
changes. Thank
you. You said we're not getting anything
done.
Um, correspondence. Wayne, anything you
want to talk about there?
Nope. Okay. Administrative reports,
anything you want to talk about there?
zoning agent. Just real quick,
uh I uh approved a well I haven't
approved. I asked for more information.
Mobile station is going to well wants to
upgrade the fascia sign over on the
canopy. So mobile station or is the one
down at 316? Yeah. Okay. You should
carefully look at the sign rags because
I have now I've passed along the sign
rags to the to the people who want to go
because it just you know some back and
forth going on because every window is
completely signed over as you drive by
there understood that of the building
and this is for the facade itself I got
for the uh you know if they're going to
change what they're doing they ought
comply with the with the rent. I'm not
sure that the company
that I I am sure the company that's
asked for this change is not the company
that controls the rest of the or is
having has anything to do with it. It's
just the company that's going to fix the
can or work on the canopy. Okay. All I
can tell you is I think they got they
have exceeded the maximum number of
signs by Well, are we talking the Shell
gas station or the mobile? Mobile
mobile. Oh, I Oh, that one. Okay, I'm in
the wrong one. I shell
316. Okay. Yeah, I think extra shell and
I didn't hear extraart. So, okay. Yeah,
they're not they're not the big
offenders. Actually, they tried to
comply. They put a bunch of these
feather signs up one year and they took
them down because they said, "Okay,
yeah, it's the Shell station. I'm not
happy with their
signs." Um, minor thing, a deck on
Shotty Mill Road that that that was
approved. Um, there was no issues with
that. Um, today I I denied an
application
uh to construct
a addition with an uh a garage
underneath uh that was proposed for a
325 Lake
Road. It did not meet the uh sideyard
requirements. Okay. So,
okay. What What is going on with Long
Hail? That construction house.
I think it's across from Bear Swan.
Across Oh, Stone House. Yeah. What's
going on over there? They don't have a a
Do they need a certification of
occupancy there? Somebody's living
there. I know for sure. Um, that would
be a building inspector question. that
that has been building inspector knows
of that situation. So yeah, this does
this people live in there. The answer is
from the building inspector is that
they're living in the house that the
house was never condemned or was never
deemed u unfit for occupation and you
can live in a house while you were while
you are renovating it. Okay. Yeah,
because they are there consistently. I
know they cleaned up today, but I have
garbage everywhere. I don't want to
speak for the building inspector. I'm
just relaying the information that I I'm
not speaking for the building inspector.
Okay. But as far as the uh the cleanup
and that you've been involved in that?
Uh I haven't. Jim has, but I drive I
drive by. Yeah. Both Bill and I both
were complaining because they the
cleanup and the mess comes and it goes
all over the place, the garbage.
And they have dumpster out there. No,
they don't. They've I mean, it comes and
goes from my perspective. I don't have a
dumpster. They're supposed to have a
dumpster. I don't have a dumpster. No,
they don't have no There used to be
dumpster there. Actually, there were
several dumpsters in and out time. No
more.
Um, but as of right now, I I don't see a
huge issue with it right now. They
they've been cleaning up little by
little, but it's just it's the clean up
then it's a mess and it's just Yeah, it
goes huge up and down garbage bags
collect and then I was fixing the guard
rail there damaged by the trees. That's
that's something public works is doing
public works are doing well they cut the
trees down. public works was there doing
that and and I know that we we had our
budget cut on construction but Skinner
road
is absolute
mess
like paving it or that's not us or
that's that's more you missed your
chance to ask the right guy. I know I
know we got some money back from the
state but
no that would be that would be an Eric
question. So pave and mo is not part of
our works, but I think that it's on a
list to get some work done this year if
I remember right. We've always got a
list of road disaster disaster. But
um last meeting they he gave a list
quickly of all the different roads that
are up to work this summer and I think
that was on they're supposed to be
working on this summer. Great. They did
a great job.
That's my report. Okay. Inland wetlands
the inland wetlands meeting was again
cancelled. So I got no report there.
Town planner John. Uh I don't have
anything further. I was going to mention
the the the potential legislation for
fair share, but that's Yeah, that's it's
still pending.
Yeah, fair share doesn't sound very
fair.
I guess we'll see what comes out. I
probably should have added that all last
week I was at Casio training.
And I've yet to find out whether I
passed the test. Okay. Y Oh, and yeah.
So, CASIO is a Connecticut Association
of Zoning Enforcement Officials. It's
required training for people in my
position.
I I passed the CLA. I took your I send
send you a copy. Okay. Yeah, I was going
to mention that, but most of the people
I haven't heard from are not here
tonight. So, we won't talk about the uh
required by annual training
there. Public speak. Uh, who did
Katherine Hutchinson finally drop off
when it was time for her? I guess I
don't see her here anymore. Maybe we've
got no more public now. Okay, moving on
to approval of the minutes.
Yes.
Did Did we cover the new business items?
We did. Yep. They were quick. All we did
was we uh scheduled Well, I gave Jim his
certificate. Oops. New business. We set
we set the uh public hearing
for the home
occupation for
uh next month prior to the meeting.
We're going to do the text
amendment change public hearing next
month prior to the meeting. And then the
special permits to actually do things
out at uh Fitch Farm will be the month
after that in
July. So that's what we did on the new
business.
Okay. I didn't I thought I could hear
all of what you were doing before and I
thought what you were doing was moving
the agenda items around. So maybe I just
misunderstood when we were trying to
make sure that we could all hear each
other because I thought I could hear you
the whole time. But okay.
and I do business pretty quickly,
but uh
yeah, the next up is approval of the
minutes from April
15th. And I will make a motion to
approve the minutes
from the April 15th planning and zoning
meeting.
Second and second. Thank you.
Uh, any discussion on those other than
Andreas's last name spelled H A L I D I
S for the
record. That was the only That was the
only uh item I saw reading through the
minutes.
H A L H A L I D I S H A L H A
I D is David I S ascent.
So hearing uh hearing no other comments
on the
minutes. I make a motion to approve the
minutes as amended to put the correct
spelling of Hletus. a lettuce lettuce in
into the
minutes and that's it.
I'll second.
Okay. Thank you, Leanne. Uh any further
discussion hearing? None. Call for vote.
Ann I. Leanne.
I.
Andreas. I. Patrick. I. And I vote I as
well. That motion passes 500.
next meeting June 17th that'll start out
with two public
hearings
and we'll go into
uh regular meeting which will have some
more POC stuff and uh again we'll head
on down the road uh on on all that
but we're not too bad. We'll get out
here by 9:30 tonight.
Any other
discussion? Going, going, gone. I make a
motion to adjourn at 9:19 p.m.
and seconds. Thank you. All in favor say
I. I. I. Any
opposed? Any abstain? Motion passes by J
0. Thank you everybody for attending.